# Chapter 10: Map scripting  

<!-- toc orderedList:0 depthFrom:1 depthTo:6 -->

- [Chapter 10: Map scripting](#chapter-10-map-scripting)
	- [10.1 Introduction](#101-introduction)
	- [10.2 Working with the ArcPy mapping module](#102-working-with-the-arcpy-mapping-module)
	- [10.3 Opening map documents](#103-opening-map-documents)
	- [10.4 Accessing map document properties and methods](#104-accessing-map-document-properties-and-methods)
	- [10.5 Working with data frames](#105-working-with-data-frames)
	- [10.6 Working with layers](#106-working-with-layers)
	- [10.7 Fixing broken data sources](#107-fixing-broken-data-sources)
	- [10.8 Working with page layout elements](#108-working-with-page-layout-elements)
	- [10.9 Exporting maps](#109-exporting-maps)
	- [10.10 Printing maps](#1010-printing-maps)
	- [10.11 Working with PDFs](#1011-working-with-pdfs)
	- [10.12 Creating map books](#1012-creating-map-books)
	- [10.13 Using sample mapping scripts](#1013-using-sample-mapping-scripts)
	- [Points to remember](#points-to-remember)

<!-- tocstop -->

---
## 10.1 Introduction  

## 10.2 Working with the ArcPy mapping module  

## 10.3 Opening map documents  
* There are two ways to start working with a map document using the ArcPy mapping modu1e: (1) use the map document from the current ArcMap session or (2) reference an existing .mxd file stored on disk.
The MapDocument function is used to accomplish both.
The syntax of the MapDocument function is
```python
MapDocument(mxd_path)
```

* The path is a string representing an .mxd &le on disk. The following code opens a map document:
```python
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("C:/Mapping/Study_Areas.mxd")
```

* To use the current map document in ArcMap, the keyword CURRENT (in all uppercase letters) is used:
```python
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("CURRENT")
```

* It is therefore good practice to remove the reference to a map document when it is no longer needed in a script by using the Python del statement.  
A mapping script therefore often has a structure that looks something like the following:  
```python
import arcpy
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("C:/Mapping/Study_Areas.mxd")
<code that modifies map document properties>
mapdoc.save()
del mapdoc
```

## 10.4 Accessing map document properties and methods  
* In the following example, the CURRENT keyword is used to obtain the map document currently open in ArcMap , and the filePath property is used to print the system path for the .mxd file:
```python
import arcpy
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("CURRENT")
path = mapdoc.filePath
print path
del mapdoc
```   

* The following example updates the current map document's title and saves the .mxd file:
```python
import arcpy
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("CURRENT")
mapdoc.title = "Final map of study areas"
mapdoc.save()
del mapdoc
```

## 10.5 Working with data frames  
* Map documents contain one or more data frames and each data frame typically contains one or more layers.  
Data frames and layers are perfect objects for use in lists, which can help automate tasks.  
The ListDataFrames function returns a list of DataFrame objects in a map document.  
The syntax is as follows:  
```python
ListDataFrames(map_document, {wild_card})
```

* Once you have a list of data frames in a map document, you can look through them to examine or modify their properties.  
Running the following code prints a list of all the data frames in a map document:  
```python
import arcpy
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("CURRENT")
listdf = arcpy.mapping.ListDataFrames(mapdoc)
for df in listdf:
print df.name
del mapdoc
```

* If you want to work with just one of the data frames, you can use its index number, as follows:
```python
print listdf[0].name
```

* The order of a list of data frames is the same as the order used in the ArcMap table of contents.

* In most cases when you work with a map document, you are not interested in changing all the properties of a data frame, but only a few selected ones.  
For example, in the following code, the spatial reference of all data frames in a map in most cases when you work with a map document, you are not interested in changing all the properties of a data frame, but only a few se1ected ones.  
For example, in the following code, the spatial reference of all data frames in a map document is set to the same spatia1 reference as that of a specific shapefile, and the scale of all data frames is set to 1:24,000:
```python
import arcpy
dataset = "C:/map/boundary.shp"
spatialRef = arcpy.Describe(dataset).spatialReference
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("C:/map/final.mxd")
for df in arcpy.mapping.ListDataFrames(mapdoc):
	df.spatalReference = spatialRef
	df.scale = 24000
del mapdoc
```

* For example, the getExtent method can be used to obtain the extent of a layer.  
The following code pans the extent of a data frame called df based on the extent of the features in a layer object called lyr:  
```python
df.panToExtent(lyr.getExtent())
```

* The zoomToSelectedFeatures method is similar to the ArcMap operation Selection > Zoom to Selected Features.  
Running the following code zooms to the extent of all selected features in a data frame called df:  
```python
df.zoomToSelectedFeatures()
```

* If no features are selected, the code will zoom to the full extent of all layers.

## 10.6 Working with layers  
* There are two ways to reference Layer objects.  
The first approach is to use the Layer function to reference a layer (.lyr ) file on disk.  
It is similar to how map document files (.mxd) are referenced.  
The syntax of the Layer function is:
```python
Layer(lyr_file_path)
```  

* The parameter of the Layer function is the full path and &le name of an existing .lyr file.  
For example:  
```python
Lyr = arcpy.mapping.Layer("C/Mapping/study.lyr")
```

* The second approach is to use the ListLayers function to reference the layers in an .mxd file, or just the layers in a particular data frame in a map document, or the layers within a .lyr file.  
The syntax of the List La yers function is:  
```python
ListLayers(map_document_or_layer, {wild_card}, {data_frame})
```

* An optional data frame variable can be used that references a specific DataFrame object.
For example, the following code returns a list of all the layers in an ArcMap document, and then prints the names of all the layers:
```python
import arcpy
myDoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("CURRENT")
lyrlist = arcpy.mapping.ListLayers(mapdoc)
for lyr in lyrlist:
	print lyr.name
```

* To access just the layers in a specific data frame, the Data Frame object has to be referenced as a parameter.  
In the following example, the ListLayers function returns only the layers in the data frame that have index number 0.  
The wild_card parameter is skipped using an empty string ("")   
```python
import arcpy
myDoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("CURRENT")
dflist = arcpy.mapping.ListDataFrames(mapdoc)
lyrlist = arcpy.mapping.ListLayers(mapdoc, "", dflist[0])
for lyr in lyrlist:
	print lyr.name
```

* The following code illustrates how to reference the layers in a .lyr file on disk and print the name of layer objects:  
```python
import arcpy
lyrfile = arcpy.mapping.Layer("C:/Data/mylayers.lyr")
lyrlist = arcpy.mapping.ListLayers(lyrfile)
for lyr in lyrlist:
	print lyr.name
```

* A few examples will serve to illustrate the use of layer properties.  
For example, the following code turns on all the labels for the layers in the current map document using the showLabels property:  
```python
import arcpy
myDoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("CURRENT")
dflist = arcpy.mapping.ListDataFrames(mapdoc)
lyrlist = arcpy.mapping.ListLayers(mapdoc, "", dflist[0])
for lyr in lyrlist:
	lyr.showLabels = True
del lyrlist
```

* Instead of changing the properties of all the layers in a map document or a data frame, the layer properties can also be used to find a layer with a particular name.  
For example, the following code searches for a layer called "hospitals":    
```python
import arcpy
myDoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("CURRENT")
dflist = arcpy.mapping.ListDataFrames(mapdoc)
lyrlist = arcpy.mapping.ListLayers(mapdoc, "", dflist[0])
for lyr in lyrlist:
	if lyr.name == "hospitals":
		lyr.showLabels = True
del lyrlist
```

* Also remember that strings are case sensitive, so Hospitals is different from hospitals.  
To make your statements insensitive to case, you can use basic string operators.   
For example:  
```python
if lyr.name.lower() == "hospitals":
```

* The syntax of the supports method is
```python
supports(layer_property)
```

* The parameter, in this case, would consist of one of the Layer object properties, such as brightness contrast, datasetName, or others.  
The supports method returns a Boolean value, so the example code to test whether labeling is possible would look as follows:  
```python
import arcpy
myDoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("CURRENT")
dflist = arcpy.mapping.ListDataFrames(mapdoc)
lyrlist = arcpy.mapping.ListLayers(mapdoc, "", dflist[0])])
for lyr in lyrlist :
	if lyr.supports ("SHOWLABELS") == True:
	lyr.showLabels = True
del lyrlist
```

## 10.7 Fixing broken data sources  
* Prior to using a map document, you should check for broken data sources using the ListBrokenDataSources function.  
This arcpy.mapping function returns a Python list of layer objects within a map document or layer file that have broken connections to their original data source.   
The syntax is  
```python
ListBrokenDataSources(map_document_or_layer)
```

* The following code illustrates how this function can be used to print the names of the layers in a map document that have broken data sources:  
```python
import arcpy
myDoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("CURRENT")
brokenlist = arcpy.mapping.ListBrokenDataSources(mapdoc)
for lyr in brokenlist:
	print lyr.name
del mapdoc
```

* Running this code returns the names of the layers as they appear in the ArcMap table of contents.  
Instead of the name, the layer property dataSource can be used to see the current data source being referenced by the layer, as follows:  
```python
print lyr.dataSource
```

* The following methods work on three different classes: MapDocument, Layer , and TableView objects.  
In total, there are six different methods:

	```
	1. MapDocument.findAndReplaceWorkspacePaths  
	2. MapDocument.replaceWorkspaces  
	3. Layer.findAndReplaceWorkspacePath  
	4. Layer.replaceDataSource  
	5. TableView.findAndReplaceWorkspacePath  
	6. TableView.replaceDataSource  
	```

* The syntax of Map Document.findAndReplaceWorkspacePaths is
```python
MapDocument.findAndReplaceWorkspacePaths(find_workspace_path, replace_workspace_path, {validate})
```

* Running this code searches for and replaces the workspace paths of all layers and tables in a map document that share that workspace.  
For example, the following code replaces all the workspace paths in the current map document:  
```python
import arcpy
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("CURRENT")
mapdoc.findAndReplace WorkspacePaths("C:/mydata", "C:/newdata")
mapdoc.save()
del mapdoc
```

* The method works on only one workspace at a time but can be used multiple times if more than one workspace type needs to be replaced.  
The syntax of the MapDocument.replaceWorkspaces method is  
```python
MapDocument.replaceWorkspaces(old_workspace_path, old_workspace_type, new_workspace_path, new_workspace_type, {validate})
```

* For example, in the following code, references to shapefiles are redirected to feature classes in a file geodatabase:
```python
import arcpy
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("C:/mydata/project.mxd")
mapdoc.replaceWorkspaces("C:/mydata/shapes", "SHAPEFILE_WORKSPACE", "C:/mydata/database.gdb", "FILEGDB_WORKSPACE")
mapdoc.save()
del mapdoc
```

* The methods discussed so far work on map documents.  
However, data sources can also be modified for individual layers.  
The Layer.findAndReplaceWorkspacePath method works on a Layer object and performs a find-and-replace operation on the workspace path for a single layer in a map document or layer file.  
The syntax of this method is  
```python
Layer.findAndReplaceWorkspacePath(find_workspace_path, replace_workspace_path, {validate})
```

* The following code modifies the workspace for a layer that references a particular feature class in a personal geodatabase.  
Only a portion of the full path of the data source is rep laced-in this case, using a different personal geodatabase:  
```python
import arcpy
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("C:/mydata/project.mxd")
lyrlist = arcpy.mapping.ListLayers(mapdoc):
for lyr in lyrlist :
	if lyr.supports("DATASOURCE"):
		lyr.dataSource == "C:/mydata/database.gdb/hospitals":
			lyr.findAndReplaceWorkspacePath("database.gdb", "newdata.gdb")
mapdoc.save()
del mapdoc
```

* The Layer.findAndReplaceWorkspacePath method assumes the dataset has not changed.  
The replaceDataSource method can be used to change both the workspace and the dataset.  
The syntax of this method is  
```python
Layer.replaceDataSource(workspace_path, workspace_type, dataset_name, {validate})
```

* The following code replaces a specific data source.  
In this case, the value of the dataSource property is used to determine whether a layer should have its data source updated:      
```python
import arcpy
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("C:/mydata/project.mxd")
lyrlist = arcpy.mapping.ListLayers(mapdoc):
for lyr in lyrlist :
	if lyr.supports("DATASOURCE"):
		if lyr.dataSource == "C:/mydata/hospitals.shp":
			lyr.replaceDataSource("C:/mydata/hospitals.shp", "SHAPEFILE_WORKSPACE", "C:/mydata/newhospitals.shp")				
mapdoc.save()
del mapdoc
```

## 10.8 Working with page layout elements
* Similar to map documents, layout elements cannot be created using scripting so they have to already exist in a map document.    
The ListLayoutElements function can be used to identify which elements exist within the layout of a particular map document.    
The syntax of this function is  
```python
ListLayoutElements(map_document, {element_type}, (wild_card})
```

* The ListLayoutElements function returns a Python list of elements.  
The optional parameter element_type can be used to limit the list of elements to only those of a specific type.  
The specific types of elements that can be used in scripting are as follows:  
```python
DATAFRAME_ELEMENT
GRAPHIC_ELEMENT
LEGEND_ELEMENT
MAPSURROUND_ELEMENT
PICTURE_ELEMENT
TEXT_ELEMENT
```

* Each of these elements corresponds to a class in the arcpy.mapping module.  
Several of these elements are described in this section in a bit more detail.  
When getting started with layout elements, however, it can be useful to first create an inventory of what exists.  
For example, the following code creates a list of all layout elements and prints their name and type:  
```python
import arcpy
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument(r"C:\mydata\project.mxd")
elemlist = arcpy.mapping.ListLayoutElements(mapdoc)
for elem in elemlist:
	print elem.name & " " & elem.type
del mapdoc
```

* The printout may look something like the following:
```python
Legend LEGEND ELEMENT
Alternating Scale Bar MAPSURROUND_ELEMENT
North Arrow MAPSURROUND_ELEMENT
Title TEXT ELEMENT
Study Area DATAFRAME_ELEMENT
```

* Notice that several different items are called MAPSURROUND_ELEMENT.  
Technically, any layout element that has an association with a data frame is a MAPSURROUND_ELEMENT object.  
This includes the north arrow, scale bar, and scale text.  
A legend element is also associated with a data frame, but since it has some unique properties, it is a separate element type.    

* Once it is determined what layout elements are available, a specific element can be selected by using: (1) the index number of the element, (2) the element_type parameter, or (3) the wild_card parameter.    
For example, to work with the title element, the following lines of code can be used to obtain a list with only the object that contains the title.    

* Using the index number directly:  
```python
title = arcpy.mapping.ListLayoutElements(mapdoc)[3]
```

* Using the element_type parameter:  
```python
title = arcpy.mapping.ListLayoutElements(mapdoc, "TEXT_ELEMENT")[0]
```

* Using the wild_card parameter  
```python
title = arcpy.mapping.ListLayoutElements(mapdoc, "", "Title")[0]
```

* For a text element, all properties are read/write, with the exception of the type.  
The following code modifies the text of the title in a page layout to a new string.  
```python
import arcpy
mapdoc = arcpy_mapping_MapDocument("C:/mydata/project.mxd")
title = arcpy_mapping_ListLayoutElements(mapdoc, "TEXT_ELEMENT")[0]
title.text = "New study Area"
mapdoc.save()
del mapdoc
```

* A PictureElement object has a sourceImage property, which represents the path to the image data source.  
The following code illustrates how this path can be modified:  
```python
import arcpy
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("CURRENT")
elemlist = arcpy.mapping.ListLayoutElements(mapdoc, "PICTURE_ELEMENT")
for elem in elemlist:
	if elem.name == "photol":
		elem.sourceImage = "C:/myphotos/newimage.jpg"
mapdoc.save()
del mapdoc
```

* The LegendElement object has an autoAdd property, which controls whether a layer should be automatically added to the legend when a layer is added to a data frame using the AddLayer function.  
The following code illustrates how the autoAdd property can be modified to control which layer gets added:  
```python
import arcpy
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("CURRENT")
df = arcpy.mapping.ListDataFrames(mapdoc)[0]
lyr1 = arcpy.mapping.Layer("C:/mydata/Streets.lyr")
lyr2 = arcpy.mapping.Layer("C:/mydata/Ortho.lyr")
legend = arcpy.mapping.ListLayoutElements(mxd, "LEGEND_ELEMENT")[0]
legend.autoAdd = True
arcpy.mapping.AddLayer(df, lyr1, "BOTTOM")
legend.autoAdd = False
arcpy.mapping.AddLayer(df, lyr2, "BOTTOM")
mapdoc.save()
del mapdoc
```

## 10.9 Exporting maps  
* The ArcPy mapping module has a number of exporting functions.  
They are similar to the ArcMap operation File > Export Map.  
There is a separate function for each format.  
The functions are as follows:  
```
ExportToAI
ExportToBMP
ExportToEMF
ExportToEPS
ExportToGIF
ExportToJPEG
ExportToPDF
ExportToPNG
ExportToSVG
ExportToTIFF
```

* These functions all work in a similar manner.  
The only required elements for the export functions are a map document and the path and file name of the output file.  
For example, the syntax of the ExportToJPEG function is as follows:  
```python
ExportToJPEG(map_document, out_jpeg, {data_frame}, {df_export_width}, {df_export_height}, {resolution}, {world_file}, {color_mode}, {jpeg_quality}, {progressive})
```

* The dialog box options correspond directly to the parameters in the ExportToJPEG function.  
All these parameters have default values, and typically only selected parameters need to be set.  
The following code exports the page layout of a map document to a .jpg file, setting a resolution of 600 dpi:  
```python
import arcpy
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument( "C:/project/study.mxd")
arcpy.mapping.ExportToJPEG(mapdoc, "C:/project/final.jpg", "", "", "", 600)
del mapdoc
```

* Notice the use of empty strings ("") to skip several optional parameters.


## 10.10 Printing maps  
* In addition to exporting maps to files, the ArcPy mapping module contains a basic PrintMap function, which prints a specific data frame or map document to a printer or file.  
The syntax of this function is  
```python
PrintMap(map_document, {printer_name}, {data_frame}, {out_print_file})
```

## 10.11 Working with PDFs
* The PDF format has become widely used in the distribution of cartographic products.  
1n addition to the ExportToPDF function, the ArcPy mapping module has a number of classes and functions to work with .pdf files.  
First, there is the PDFDocument class.  
This object allows for the manipulation of PDF documents, including the merging of pages, setting document behavior, and creating security settings.  
The syntax of the PDFDocument class is:  
```python
PDFDocument(pdf_path)
```

* The following code creates an empty PDFDocument using the PDFDocumentCreate function, and appends three existing .pdf files into a single PDF.  
The saveAndClose method saves the resulting PDF, as follows:  
```python
import arcpy
pdfpath = "C:/project/MapBook.pdf"
pdfdoc = arcpy.mapping.PDFDocumentCreate(pdfpath)
pdfdoc.appendPages("C:/project/Cover.pdf")
pdfdoc.appendPages("C:/project/Mapl.pdf")
pdfdoc.appendPages("C:/project/Map2.pdf")
pdfdoc.saveAndClose()
del pdfdoc
```


## 10.12 Creating map books  
* The exportToPDF method for the DataDrivenPages object can be used to create a map book in POF format.  
This is not the same as the ExportToPDF function.  
The syntax of the exportToPDF method is as follows:  
```python
exportToPDF(out_pdf, {page_range_type}, {page_range_string}, {multiple_files}, {resolution}, {image_quality}, {colorspace}, {compress_vectors} , {image_compression}, {picture_symbol}, {convert_markers}, {embed_fonts},  {layers_attributes}, {georef_info})
```

* The following code prints all the pages from a map document that has DataDriven Pages enab1ed to a PDF file and p1aces an existing cover page in front:
```python
import arcpy
pdfpath = "C:/project/MapBook.pdf"
pdfdoc = arcpy.mapping.PDFDocumentCreate(pdfpath)
mapdoc = arcpy.mapping.MapDocument("C:/project/Maps.mxd")
mapdoc.dataDrivenPages.exportToPDF("C:/project/Maps.pdf")
pdfdoc.appendPages("C:/project/Cover.pdf")
pdfdoc.appendPages("C:/project/Maps.pdf")
pdfdoc.saveAndClose()
del mapdoc
```

## 10.13 Using sample mapping scripts  

## Points to remember  
